# Chapter 1 - Introduction

This book is intended to be a comprehensive guide to what has become known as CALPHAD. This is an acronym for the CALculation of PHAse Diagrams but it is also well defined by the sub-title of the CALPHAD journal, The Computer Coupling of Phase Diagrams and Thermochemistry. It is this coupling which, more than any other factor, defines the heart of this subject area.

Phase diagrams have mainly been the preserve of a limited number of practitioners. This has been partly due to the difficulties many scientists and engineers have in interpreting them, especially at the ternary and higher-order level. Their use has also been seen as rather academic, because almost all real materials are multi-component in nature and phase diagrams are generally used to represent only binary and ternary alloys. The CALPHAD method has altered this viewpoint because it is now possible to predict the phase behavior of highly complex, multi-component materials based on the extrapolation of higher-order properties from their lower-order binary and ternary systems. Furthermore, the method can be coupled with kinetic formalism to help understand and predict how materials behave in conditions well away from equilibrium, thus considerably enhancing its value.

One of the objectives of this book is to act as a benchmark for current achievements, but it also has a number of other important general objectives. Despite the undoubted success of the CALPHAD approach, any methodology based on thermodynamic concepts is often erroneously perceived as being difficult to follow, and even considered as unlikely to have a direct practical application because of its association with equilibrium situations. The authors have therefore set themselves the goals of removing such misconceptions and making the book readable by any scientifically competent beginner who wishes to apply or extend the concepts of CALPHAD to new areas.

The book begins with a chapter describing the history and growth of CALPHAD. This provides a useful point of departure for a more detailed account of the various strands which make up the CALPHAD approach. Chapters 3 and 4 then deal with the basic thermodynamics of phase diagrams and the principles of various experimental techniques. This is because one of basic pillars of the CALPHAD approach is the concept of coupling phase diagram information with all other available thermodynamic properties. It is a key factor in the assessment and characterization of the lower-order systems on which the properties of the higher- order systems are based. In order to optimize such coupling, it is not only necessary to understand the assumptions which are made in the thermodynamic functions being used, but also to grasp the inherent level of errors associated with the various experimental techniques that are used to determine both phase diagrams and associated thermodynamic properties.

Chapter 3 defines thermodynamic concepts, such as ideal/non-ideal behavior, partial/integral quantities and simple regular solution theory. This allows the relationship between the general topological features of phase diagrams and their underlying thermodynamic properties to be established and acts as a stepping stone for the discussion of more realistic models in Chapter 5. Chapter 4 deals with the advantages and disadvantages of various methods for the determination of critical points and transus lines as well as enthalpies of formation, activities, heat capacities and associated properties. The complementary nature of many measurements is stressed, together with the need to combine the various measurements into one overall assessment. This chapter is not intended to be a treatise on experimental methods but provides a necessary background for the intelligent assessment of experimental data, including some appreciation of why it may be necessary to include weighting procedures when combining data from different sources.

Chapter 5 examines various models used to describe solution and compound phases, including those based on random substitution, the sub-lattice model, stoichiometric and non-stoichiometric compounds and models applicable to ionic liquids and aqueous solutions. Thermodynamic models are a central issue to CALPHAD, but it should be emphasised that their success depends on the input of suitable coefficients which are usually derived empirically. An important question is, therefore, how far it is possible to eliminate the empirical element of phase diagram calculations by substituting a treatment based on first principles, using only wave-mechanics and atomic properties. This becomes especially important when there is an absence of experimental data, which is frequently the case for the metastable phases that have also to be considered within the framework of CALPHAD methods.

Chapter 6 therefore deals in detail with this issue, including the latest attempts to obtain a resolution for a long-standing controversy between the values obtained by thermochemical and first-principle routes for so-called ‘lattice stabilities’. This chapter also examines (i) the role of the pressure variable on lattice stability, (ii) the prediction of the values of interaction coefficients for solid phases, (iii) the relative stability of compounds of the same stoichiometry but different crystal structures and (iv) the relative merits of empirical and first-principles routes.

Another area where empirical, semi-empirical and more fundamental physical approaches overlap is in the case of ordering processes. Chapter 7 carefully analyses the advantages and disadvantages of many competing methods that have all been used in determining the relationship between the degree of structural order, composition and temperature, including the important question of short-range order. The chapter includes a description of mainstream ordering models such as the Monte Carlo method (MC), the Bragg—Williams~Gorsky (BWG) model and the Cluster Variation Method (CVM) as well as a number of hybrid and empirical toutes. There is also reference to the role of lattice vibrations and the effect of kinetic stabilisation of ordered states that are not always considered under this heading.

Magnetic ordering is dealt with separately in Chapter 8. This is because it is necessary to have a very accurate description of the magnetic component of the Gibbs energy in order to have any chance of accounting for the phase transformations in ferrous materials, which are still one of the most widely used material types in existence. Furthermore, it is necessary to handle situations where the end-members of the system exhibit different kinds of magnetism. The various effects caused by both internal and external magnetic fields are enumerated, and the reasons for using different approaches to structural and magnetic ordering are also discussed.

Although the previous three chapters have been concerned with placing the CALPHAD methodology on a sound physical basis, the over-riding objective of such a method is to generate a reliable and user-friendly output that reflects various properties of multicomponent industrial materials. The last three chapters therefore return to the more practical theme of how this can be achieved.

Chapter 9 deals with the general principles of computational thermodynamics, which includes a discussion of how Gibbs energy minimisation can be practically achieved and various ways of presenting the output. Optimisation and, in particular, ‘optimiser’ codes, such as the Lukas programme and PARROT, are discussed. The essential aim of these codes is to reduce the statistical error between calculated phase equilibria, thermodynamic properties and the equivalent experimentally measured quantities.

Chapter 10 provides an exhaustive description of how these techniques can be applied to a large number of industrial alloys and other materials. This includes a discussion of solution and substance databases and step-by-step examples of multi- component calculations. Validation of calculated equilibria in multi-component alloys is given by a detailed comparison with experimental results for a variety of steels, titanium- and nickel-base alloys. Further selected examples include the formation of deleterious phases, complex precipitation sequences, sensitivity factor analysis, intermetallic alloys, alloy design, slag, slag-metal and other complex chemical equilibria and nuclear applications.

Although Chapter 10 clearly validates CALPHAD methodology for the calculation of phase equilibria in complex industrial alloys, there are many processes that depart significantly from equilibrium. There may be a systematic but tecognisable deviation, as in a casting operation, or quite marked changes may occur as in the metastable structures formed during rapid solidification, mechanical alloying or vapour deposition. The limitations of a ‘traditional’ CALPHAD approach have long been understood and a combination of thermodynamics and kinetics is clearly a logical and desirable extension of the CALPHAD methodology, especially if these are designed to use the same data bases that have already been validated for equilibrium calculations. The penultimate chapter therefore describes a number of successful applications that have been made in treating deviations from equilibrium, for both solid- and liquid-phase transformations, including the Scheil-Gulliver solidification model and its various modifications.

The final chapter presents a view of where CALPHAD may go in the future. Such a process involves, by its very nature, some rather personal views. For this we do not apologise, but only hope that much of what is suggested will be achieved in practice when, at some point in time, other authors attempt a review of CALPHAD.
